README.md, before:

# Perceptrons to Transformers

Clean, minimal implementations of machine learning algorithms built from first principles.

This repository contains code referenced in my blog series **"From Perceptrons to transformers"** where I document my journey learning AI/ML fundamentals.

## 📚 Blog Series

Read the full series on [Dev.to](https://dev.to/rnilav)

## 📂 What's Inside

Each module contains:
- **Core implementation** - Clean, documented code
- **Interactive playground** - Streamlit app for hands-on exploration
- **Jupyter notebook** - Step-by-step walkthrough with visualizations
- **README** - Usage guide and key concepts

### Available Modules

1. **[01-perceptron/](01-perceptron/)** - The first artificial neuron
   - Blog: [The First Artificial Neuron: Where It All Started](TBU)
   
2. **[02-xor-problem/](02-xor-problem/)** - Coming soon

## 🚀 Quick Start

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/perceptrons-to-transformers.git
cd perceptrons-to-transformers

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Run the perceptron playground
cd 01-perceptron
streamlit run perceptron_playground.py

# Or explore the notebook
jupyter notebook 01_perceptron.ipynb
```

## 📋 Requirements

- Python 3.8+
- NumPy (numerical computing)
- Matplotlib (plotting)
- Plotly (interactive visualizations)
- Streamlit (interactive apps)
- Jupyter (notebooks)

## 🎯 Learning Philosophy

This repository follows a **first principles approach**:
- Build everything from scratch (no ML frameworks)
- Understand the math and intuition
- See working code with real examples
- Learn by doing and experimenting

## 🤝 Contributing

Found a bug or have a suggestion? Open an issue or submit a pull request!

## 📄 License

MIT License - Feel free to use this code for learning.

## 🔗 Connect

- **Dev.to:** [@yourusername](https://dev.to/rnilav)
- **LinkedIn:** [Your Name](https://linkedin.com/in/rnilav)
- **GitHub:** [@yourusername](https://github.com/rnilav)

---

**Note:** This is a learning project. Code is educational and may not be optimized for production use.

Commit message:

updated README.md file with AI coding assistant acknowledgement

README.md, after:

# Perceptrons to Transformers

Clean, minimal implementations of machine learning algorithms built from first principles. 

This repository contains code referenced in my blog series **"From Perceptrons to transformers"** where I document my journey learning AI/ML fundamentals.

Disclaimer: Code in the repo has been developed with the help of AI coding assistant tools.

## 📚 Blog Series

Read the full series on [Dev.to](https://dev.to/rnilav)

## 📂 What's Inside

Each module contains:
- **Core implementation** - Clean, documented code
- **Interactive playground** - Streamlit app for hands-on exploration
- **Jupyter notebook** - Step-by-step walkthrough with visualizations
- **README** - Usage guide and key concepts

### Available Modules

1. **[01-perceptron/](01-perceptron/)** - The first artificial neuron
   - Blog: [The First Artificial Neuron: Where It All Started](TBU)
   
2. **[02-xor-problem/](02-xor-problem/)** - Coming soon

## 🚀 Quick Start

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/perceptrons-to-transformers.git
cd perceptrons-to-transformers

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Run the perceptron playground
cd 01-perceptron
streamlit run perceptron_playground.py

# Or explore the notebook
jupyter notebook 01_perceptron.ipynb
```

## 📋 Requirements

- Python 3.8+
- NumPy (numerical computing)
- Matplotlib (plotting)
- Plotly (interactive visualizations)
- Streamlit (interactive apps)
- Jupyter (notebooks)

## 🎯 Learning Philosophy

This repository follows a **first principles approach**:
- Build everything from scratch (no ML frameworks)
- Understand the math and intuition
- See working code with real examples
- Learn by doing and experimenting

## 🤝 Contributing

Found a bug or have a suggestion? Open an issue or submit a pull request!

## 📄 License

MIT License - Feel free to use this code for learning.

## 🔗 Connect

- **Dev.to:** [@yourusername](https://dev.to/rnilav)
- **LinkedIn:** [Your Name](https://linkedin.com/in/rnilav)
- **GitHub:** [@yourusername](https://github.com/rnilav)

---

**Note:** This is a learning project. Code is educational and may not be optimized for production use.
